code/README.md, before:

# MTCOV: Python code
Copyright (c) 2020 [Martina Contisciani](https://www.is.mpg.de/person/mcontisciani) and [Caterina De Bacco](http://cdebacco.com)

Implements the algorithm described in:

Contisciani M.,Power E. & De Bacco C. (2020). *Community detection with node attributes in multilayer networks*, arXiv:2004.09160.

If you use this code please cite this [article](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.09160) (_preprint_).  

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the 'Software'), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.


## Files
- `main.py` : General version of the algorithm. It performs overlapping community detection in multilayer directed and undirected networks by combining together the topology of interactions and node attributes.
- `MTCOV.py` : Contains the class definition of a Multilayer network with all the member functions required. This code is optimized to use sparse matrices.
- `MTCOV_nonsparse.py` : Contains the class definition of a Multilayer network with all the member functions required. This code is not optimized to handle sparse matrices. We suggest to use it only with networks having N < 1000 nodes. This is the first version of the code.
- `tools.py` : Contains non-class functions for handling the data.
- `main_cv_single_real.py` : Code for performing a cross-validation procedure, in order to estimate the hyperparameters **C** and **gamma**. It runs with a given C and gamma and returns a file summarizing the results over all folds. The output file contains the value of the log-likelihood, the AUC of the link prediction and the accuracy of the attribute prediction, both in the train and in test sets.
- `run_cv.sh` : Code for running the cross-validation procedure with a given range of C and gamma values.
- `cv_functions.py` : Contains functions for performing the K-fold cross-validation procedure.
- `analysis_cross_validation.ipynb` : Jupyter Notebook for analysing the results of the cross-validation.
- `generate_data.py` : Code for generating the synthetic data used in the analysis reported in the paper. It generates multilayer synthetic directed networks with different kinds of structure in the various layers. The network structure is generated by using a stochastic block model, and the attributes are generated by matching them with planted communities in different ratios. The code can be generalized to accomodate more than 2 communities.
- `test.py` : Code for testing the main algorithm.
- `test_cv.py` : Code for testing the cross-validation procedure.


## Usage
To test the program on the given example file, type

`python main.py`

It will use the sample network contained in `./data/input`. The adjacency tensor _adj.csv_ represents a directed, unweighted network with **N=300** nodes and **L=4** layers. The design matrix _X.csv_ contains the attribute _Metadata_ with **Z=2** modalities used in the analysis. The algorithm runs with **C=2** communities and **gamma=0.5**. 

### Parameters
- **-j** : Input file name of the adjacency tensor, *(default='adj.csv')*.
- **-c** : Input file name of the design matrix, *(default='X.csv')*.
- **-o** : Name of the source of the edge, *(default='source')*.
- **-r** : Name of the target of the edge, *(default='target')*.
- **-x** : Name of the column with node labels, *(default='Name')*.
- **-a** : Name of the attribute to consider in the analysis, *(default='Metadata')*.
- **-C** : Number of communities, *(default=2)*.
- **-g** : Scaling parameter gamma, *(default=0.5)*.
- **-u** : Flag to call the undirected network, *(default=False)*.
- **-d** : Flag to force a dense transformation of the adjacency tensor, *(default=True)*.
- **-F** : Flag to choose the convergence procedure, *(default='log')*. If 'log' the convergence is based on the loglikelihood values; 
            if 'deltas' the convergence is based on the differences in the parameters values. The latter is suggested 
            when the dataset is big (N > 1000 ca.).
- **-z** : Seed for random real numbers. 
- **-e** : Error for the initialization of W, *(default=0.1)*.
- **-i** : Number of iterations with different random initialization; the final parameters will be the one corresponding to the realization leading to the max likelihood, *(default=1)*.
- **-t** : Tolerance parameter for convergence, *(default=0.0001)*.
- **-y** : Decision variable for convergence, *(default=10)*.
- **-m** : Maximum number of EM steps before aborting, *(default=500)*.
- **-E** : Output file suffix, *(default='.dat')*.
- **-I** : Path of the input folder, *(default='../data/input/')*.
- **-O** : Path of the output folder, *(default='../data/output/test/')*.
- **-A** : Flag to call the assortative network, *(default=False)*.

## Input format
The multilayer network should be stored in a CSV file. An example of row is

`node1 node2 0 0 1`

where the first and second columns are the _source_ and _target_ nodes of the edge, respectively; l+2 column tells if there is that edge in the l-th layer and the weight. In this example the edge node1 --> node2 exists in layer 3 with weight 1, but not in layer 1 and 2.

Note: if the network is undirected, you only need to input each edge once. You then need to specify to the algorithm that you are considering the undirected case by giving as a command line input parameter **-u=True**. 

The design matrix should be stored in a CSV file, where one column (_Name_) indicates the node labels. 

## Output
The MTCOV returns a compressed file inside the `./data/output/test` folder. To load and print the out-going membership matrix:

`theta = np.load('theta_test_GT.npz')`.      
`print(theta['u'])`

*theta* contains the two NxC membership matrices **U** *('u')* and **V** *('v')*, the LxCxC affinity tensor **W** *('w')*, the CxZ matrix **beta** *('beta')*, the total number of iterations *('max_it')*, the nodes of the network *('nodes')*, the value of the maximum likelihood *('maxL')* and the number of realizations *('N_real')*.

Commit message:

add scientific reports reference in README

code/README.md, after:

# MTCOV: Python code
Copyright (c) 2020 [Martina Contisciani](https://www.is.mpg.de/person/mcontisciani) and [Caterina De Bacco](http://cdebacco.com)

Implements the algorithm described in:

[1] Contisciani M., Power E. & De Bacco C. (2020). *Community detection with node attributes in multilayer networks*,  Scientific Reports **10**, 15736 (2020).  

If you use this code please cite [1]. 

The paper can be found [here](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-020-72626-y) (_Published version, open access_) or [here](https://arxiv.org/abs/2004.09160) (_preprint_).  

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the 'Software'), to deal in the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON INFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.


## Files
- `main.py` : General version of the algorithm. It performs overlapping community detection in multilayer directed and undirected networks by combining together the topology of interactions and node attributes.
- `MTCOV.py` : Contains the class definition of a Multilayer network with all the member functions required. This code is optimized to use sparse matrices.
- `MTCOV_nonsparse.py` : Contains the class definition of a Multilayer network with all the member functions required. This code is not optimized to handle sparse matrices. We suggest to use it only with networks having N < 1000 nodes. This is the first version of the code.
- `tools.py` : Contains non-class functions for handling the data.
- `main_cv_single_real.py` : Code for performing a cross-validation procedure, in order to estimate the hyperparameters **C** and **gamma**. It runs with a given C and gamma and returns a file summarizing the results over all folds. The output file contains the value of the log-likelihood, the AUC of the link prediction and the accuracy of the attribute prediction, both in the train and in test sets.
- `run_cv.sh` : Code for running the cross-validation procedure with a given range of C and gamma values.
- `cv_functions.py` : Contains functions for performing the K-fold cross-validation procedure.
- `analysis_cross_validation.ipynb` : Jupyter Notebook for analysing the results of the cross-validation.
- `generate_data.py` : Code for generating the synthetic data used in the analysis reported in the paper. It generates multilayer synthetic directed networks with different kinds of structure in the various layers. The network structure is generated by using a stochastic block model, and the attributes are generated by matching them with planted communities in different ratios. The code can be generalized to accomodate more than 2 communities.
- `test.py` : Code for testing the main algorithm.
- `test_cv.py` : Code for testing the cross-validation procedure.


## Usage
To test the program on the given example file, type

`python main.py`

It will use the sample network contained in `./data/input`. The adjacency tensor _adj.csv_ represents a directed, unweighted network with **N=300** nodes and **L=4** layers. The design matrix _X.csv_ contains the attribute _Metadata_ with **Z=2** modalities used in the analysis. The algorithm runs with **C=2** communities and **gamma=0.5**. 

### Parameters
- **-j** : Input file name of the adjacency tensor, *(default='adj.csv')*.
- **-c** : Input file name of the design matrix, *(default='X.csv')*.
- **-o** : Name of the source of the edge, *(default='source')*.
- **-r** : Name of the target of the edge, *(default='target')*.
- **-x** : Name of the column with node labels, *(default='Name')*.
- **-a** : Name of the attribute to consider in the analysis, *(default='Metadata')*.
- **-C** : Number of communities, *(default=2)*.
- **-g** : Scaling parameter gamma, *(default=0.5)*.
- **-u** : Flag to call the undirected network, *(default=False)*.
- **-d** : Flag to force a dense transformation of the adjacency tensor, *(default=True)*.
- **-F** : Flag to choose the convergence procedure, *(default='log')*. If 'log' the convergence is based on the loglikelihood values; 
            if 'deltas' the convergence is based on the differences in the parameters values. The latter is suggested 
            when the dataset is big (N > 1000 ca.).
- **-z** : Seed for random real numbers. 
- **-e** : Error for the initialization of W, *(default=0.1)*.
- **-i** : Number of iterations with different random initialization; the final parameters will be the one corresponding to the realization leading to the max likelihood, *(default=1)*.
- **-t** : Tolerance parameter for convergence, *(default=0.0001)*.
- **-y** : Decision variable for convergence, *(default=10)*.
- **-m** : Maximum number of EM steps before aborting, *(default=500)*.
- **-E** : Output file suffix, *(default='.dat')*.
- **-I** : Path of the input folder, *(default='../data/input/')*.
- **-O** : Path of the output folder, *(default='../data/output/test/')*.
- **-A** : Flag to call the assortative network, *(default=False)*.

## Input format
The multilayer network should be stored in a CSV file. An example of row is

`node1 node2 0 0 1`

where the first and second columns are the _source_ and _target_ nodes of the edge, respectively; l+2 column tells if there is that edge in the l-th layer and the weight. In this example the edge node1 --> node2 exists in layer 3 with weight 1, but not in layer 1 and 2.

Note: if the network is undirected, you only need to input each edge once. You then need to specify to the algorithm that you are considering the undirected case by giving as a command line input parameter **-u=True**. 

The design matrix should be stored in a CSV file, where one column (_Name_) indicates the node labels. 

## Output
The MTCOV returns a compressed file inside the `./data/output/test` folder. To load and print the out-going membership matrix:

`theta = np.load('theta_test_GT.npz')`.      
`print(theta['u'])`

*theta* contains the two NxC membership matrices **U** *('u')* and **V** *('v')*, the LxCxC affinity tensor **W** *('w')*, the CxZ matrix **beta** *('beta')*, the total number of iterations *('max_it')*, the nodes of the network *('nodes')*, the value of the maximum likelihood *('maxL')* and the number of realizations *('N_real')*.
